12 CFR Part 1002 - Equal Credit Opportunity Act (Regulation B) | Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
Skip to main content
12 CFR Part 1002 - Equal Credit Opportunity Act (Regulation B)
Most recently amended Aug. 2, 2024
On April 22, 2026, the CFPB issued a final rule amending Regulation B, the regulation implementing the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA).
Specifically, the CFPB removed the “effects test” from the regulation and affirmatively stated that ECOA does not recognize disparate-impact liability. It also modified the prohibition on “discouragement” to focus on statements of intent to discriminate rather than statements that merely create negative impressions. Lastly, the rule prohibited creditors from using race, color, national origin, or sex as common characteristics under Special Purpose Credit Programs (SPCPs) and imposed additional requirements for for-profit creditors wishing to use SPCPs. The amendments facilitate compliance with ECOA by ensuring that the obligations are consistent with the statute. An updated version of Regulation B will be published soon.
Read the final rule
On May 1, 2026, the CFPB issued a final rule that revised certain provisions of Regulation B, subpart B, which implements changes to ECOA made by section 1071 of the Dodd-Frank Act by refocusing coverage under the rule to core lenders, products, and data points.
For example, the rule excluded merchant cash advances, small dollar transactions, and agricultural loans from coverage under Regulation B, subpart B. It also minimized data collection and reporting requirements to adhere more closely to statutory requirements for those creditors that remain covered under the rule. The rule eliminated pricing and denial-reason data and removed reference to LGBTQIA+-owned business status, as well as the use of disaggregated categories in collecting race and ethnicity data points. These changes thereby eliminate unnecessary compliance burdens that would raise the cost and may lower the availability of credit for small businesses and communities. An updated version of Regulation B will be published soon.
Read the final rule
Regulation B protects applicants from discrimination in any aspect of a credit transaction.
View current regulation
View all versions of this regulation
Search this regulation
Credit transactions and aspects of credit transactions include:
Consumer credit
Business credit
Mortgage loans
Refinancing
Open-end credit
Credit applications
Standards of creditworthiness
Denial of credit
Servicing and collection
Revocation, alteration, or termination of credit
The regulation covers topics such as:
Discrimination
Discouragement
Notification of action taken (including adverse action)
Appraisal and other written valuations
Special purpose credit programs
Limitation on collection of certain protected information
Self-testing and self-correction
Evaluation of applications
Signature requirements
Mandatory information collection for monitoring purposes
Additional resources
Consumer FAQs
Credit discrimination
Other resources
Mortgage Appraisal and Other Written Valuations Under ECOA Compliance Resources
ECOA Compliance Resources